innovation and novelty are seen as important elements in game design but systematic tools and methods for producing creative ideas may be little known or poorly available, and creativity itself can be seen as something mystical [2] that cannot be methodologically enhanced. however, modern creativity research claims that creativity is in the scope of learning and techniques for generating ideas are argued to give competitive advantage [1,2,6]. this may be an important message to designers, but also to the creative leaders. even the most creative mind can commit the crime of repetition. this is because it is natural for the mind to create patterns [1]. usually these patterns are helpful, but seeking new and innovative solutions as in product design, one should be able "to think outside" the common practices. designers are required to be creative on demand, yet the procedures and methods for breaking the common approaches are often based on intuitive belief systems rather than on empirically validated theory [9]. one of the solutions to enhance creativity in game design is to use idea generation techniques that help designers to be creative on demand. studies from other industries suggest that there is a strong relationship between the number of idea generation techniques and the number of successful products [8,10]. however, brainstorming, the best known technique, does not necessarily lead to innovation [5], which is also acknowledged in game design [3]. even though brainstorming is useful in some cases, no single creativity technique can provide the ultimate solution for innovation in general: different techniques are needed [10]. idea generation may seem a relatively easy task. however, while anybody can come up with some ideas, applicable and novel ideas do not come easily [9]. this is well established in those studies showing that one of the characteristics of companies successful in development is their ability to generate ideas [3]. in a successful ideating session, the generation of ideas is separated from idea evaluation and early criticism may be seen as harmful to the overall process[6]. whereas vertical thinking targets the one and only solution, lateral thinking targets quantity [1] as a tool for quality [6]. additionally, since idea generation is not a random process governed solely by an individual's personal traits, but a relatively structured process that can be explained [8], a methodological approach is indeed possible. since we believe that game ideas have their special characteristics, and that and general idea generation techniques may not be so very supportive of the nature of game design processes, we designed several experimental game-specific techniques in the gamespace project (http://gamelab.uta.fi/gamespace). these techniques are based on game-related stimuli and structural modules for ideating casual, multiplayer and mobile games. during the project, computer programs and other tools were created to help documenting, game analysis, randomization of stimuli and communicative aspects. these techniques are easy to approach from their functional aspects: the activity of idea generation is based on playing specific board games, card games, using small computer applications or other tools and toys. in light of our workshop experiences with finnish game professionals in 2006 and 2007, these idea generation techniques can be successfully utilized and help designers to create applicable and novel game ideas that they would not otherwise come up with. hence these techniques can be seen as a successful way to help "creativity on demand" in game design practices. some of these techniques have already been fruitfully adopted by the finnish mobile game industry. while we have already documented several positive user experiences and know that our techniques work, we are conducting a more extensive user study in autumn 2007 and spring 2008 to gain a systematic understanding of game specific idea generation techniques and game idea generation processes.